a video about the politics of privilege
the problem in 21st century is not that
people use the concept of privilege it's
not even that they overuse the concept
of privilege let's admit it to ourselves
term is getting worn out it's getting
tired the problem is they proceed in an
unexamined way to contrast privilege to
something that is presumed to be it's
counter posed opposite and what is the
opposite of privilege I have never
driven a car in my whole entire life
never once I have had the privilege of
living downtown I have had the privilege
of being a pedestrian where I could walk
from my apartment
to the gym is it such a great privilege
for one thing you have to pay higher
rent to be downtown for another thing
you can see YouTube videos here on this
channel of me walking in the freezing
cold at 6 o'clock in the morning from my
home to the gym it's not always so easy
or enjoyable being a pedestrian
nevertheless I'm completely willing to
admit I have had the privilege of
refusing to own a car the privilege of
refusing to drive a car how you do not
think of myself as morally superior to
those who drive cars and I can also
recognize there are some jobs or if I
have been hired for the job it would
have been necessary for me to drive a
car very briefly I applied for jobs at
branded factories so that is being a
baker but in reality it's at a huge
scale or it's a factory process you're
operating machines it's not like being a
baker in your own kitchen when I applied
to work in bread factories you might say
I was completely aware that if I got the
job if we're off of the job and I
accepted the job
I absolutely would need to own a car so
yeah there's an element of luck
and there's element of privilege in
being able to refuse a car i have never
murdered anyone in my entire life it may
be said that i have had a privileged
life because i have never been in the
sort of circumstances that really would
require me to kill someone and you know
i've lived in some
the world like Cambodia and Laos where
you can meet and talk to people who grew
up in circumstances of ongoing civil war
tribalism mercenary work where it really
was normal for people to have committed
murder
killings multiple times in their life
growing up let's not digress into
details but yes compared to say a member
of a northeast Cambodian tribal group
who lived through the Cambodian Civil
War period I have had the privilege of
never having to engage in any kind of
acts of killing murder civil war neither
in self-defence nor in a mercenary
fashion or you know neither working for
the Communist Party nor against the
Communist Party in Colombo in Cambodia
the reaction multiple communist parties
fighting against each other it's even
more more complex than that
sure just being born into a civilization
with a high level of stability peace
order and good government I have had the
privilege of never really being cornered
into that type of violence but what are
we killed for posing to this privilege
I've had the privilege of being a
pedestrian had the privilege of ever
owning a car in Victoria British
Columbia Canada City I used to live in
there were a whole lot of kids who
received a car as their high school
graduation gift
their kids you started driving a car
during high school they received like a
BMW this is quite common in Victoria
very expensive car is there a graduation
gift and then they're driving a luxury
vehicle you know from the end of high
school forward okay we both have
privilege what about someone who chooses
to have dramatically lower rent by not
renting an apartment downtown they rent
an apartment in the suburbs they may pay
half as much in rent as I pay but they
then take on the responsibility in the
annoyance of owning a car or paying for
insurance on the car or having to pay
for parking everyone likes to complain
about paying for parking they live a
very different life they pay half as
much rent they probably have a larger
apartment you know they live in kind of
better conditions in various ways they
don't steel with the noise and crowding
of being
downtown a downtown part of the city
Victoria um they can't walk from their
apartment to a gym maybe they have to
drive but they also have the privileges
and advantages of driving a car okay the
problem is we can't simply counterpose
privilege to the opposite of privilege
because there is no opposite of
privilege the only thing that people are
employing and normally without being
aware of it is that they have some kind
of unchallenged cultural assumption
about what's normal what's default but
that isn't itself in fact just another
set of privileges it's just a more
familiar set of privileges to them to
their specific subjective standpoint
northeastern Cambodia there are a lot of
people who grow up inheriting rights
land they inherit a plot of land to grow
rice on and the plot of land they
inherit seems to be the same size as
everyone else's plot of rice right and
so their rice farmers they live among
rice farmers the land is divided up into
little squares and it seems like
everyone has a kind of equal amount of
privilege I'll tell you why in just a
second it's very easy for those people
in their small town ignorance to look at
university educated people in the big
city and complain oh they have all the
privilege those big city people who are
going and getting a university education
they have privilege whereas we don't in
reality there are just two different set
of privileges here there are many ways
in which someone in the big city in
Cambodia who goes to university and then
probably can't get any better job than
being a small town schoolteacher you
know teaching children in a small town
school um that person probably is a much
more difficult and uncertain life
compared to the rice farmer and let's
not forget inheriting the ownership of
farmland that is privileged in the most
fundamental medieval sense of the word
privilege this is privilege in a sense
that hasn't changed since you know the
era of aristocrats and serfs as opposed
to landowners now very briefly in Kim
Odia the you step of communist
government the communist government fell
apart when communism was failing one of
the stages of its failure was that the
land that they had taken away from
everyone to centralize under the
ownership the Communist Party they
distributed they privatized land
ownership and they distributed to people
more or less equally yeah you could put
a footnote in here you'd add a lot of
details and of course there were a lot
of conflicts that grew out of it but
nevertheless you can go to many villages
in Cambodia still today rural Cambodia
where the land was divided up into a
bunch of squares and kind of each family
got a plot of rice land the fact that
they may perceive that as a default
common or normal privilege doesn't mean
it's not a privilege it's merely a type
of privilege they are more familiar with
Australia mining corporations I met a
guy who was a safety engineer in a
mining corporation and so you can
imagine his job is a set of highly
technical skills checking that the air
pressure is okay with this hose checking
that the water pressure is okay with
this hose checking the particulate
matter in the air air quality checking
the certain types of machines and
devices are working properly
mechanically that they're still reliable
if you have a scale that measures weight
is the scale accurate he works against a
checklist of these things day by day and
these jobs if you look at it step by
step each thing on the checklist each
one of those jobs could be done by a
high school dropout with no university
education this guy I met he had the
privilege of going to university I think
he got a master's degree in mechanical
engineering if not he got a master's
degree in one of those practical
sciences and the bane of his existence
was that these Australian mining
corporations would hire people who were
high school dropouts with no education
people hadn't been through any of the
struggle made the effort he made they
would hire them just because their
father or grandfather was an employee
at the same mine was an employee of the
same mining corporation 40 years ago
apparently this is common in Australia
according to this guy there are a lot of
companies that will that will hire
people not based on merit not based on
education but because of who their
parents or grandparents were so this is
again privileged in a very medieval and
feudal sense this is an inherited title
right and he complained to me that these
kids grow up aware that they are
guaranteed a high-paying job for life so
he said they're incredibly lazy in
school they drop out of high school as
soon as they can at age 16 to go and
work in the mine he said that most of
them are arrogant alcoholics they start
drinking and being reckless because they
know from their childhood because their
father had this job therefore they're
guaranteed a good job to mine and of
course I think also he's aware although
he had the privilege of going to
university and learning the kind of
aspects of physics and chemistry and
theoretical science that lurk behind the
safety procedures there's a level on
which technically any high school
dropout can do the same job that he does
anyone can be trained in two days or
less to you know use a little device to
measure particulate matter in the air
and then write it down and then they're
told okay if the value is above this
amount make a phone call and inform this
person the actual procedures they have
to follow do not require an advance your
first education but both sides both
sides each each receives the other is
privileged the high school dropout has
resentment against the university boy oh
you think you're better than me because
you got an education you went to
university you had all this privilege
going and studying physics and chemistry
and mechanical engineering and a
university in the big city and the other
side that kind of thing from his
perspective yeah he went to university
he probably has student debt he probably
had to live in a tiny apartment as a
student for years doing this boring
repetitive work learning chemistry or
whatever he had to work he feels he had
to work really hard to get this job as
opposed to this kid who has privilege
you dropped at a high school you didn't
suffer through years of education that I
suffered through your into this job just
because of who your father or
grandfather was
each side perceives the other as having
privilege and the fundamental point of
trying to get across here is that is
correct
all right the opposite of privilege is
just a different set of privileges
whatever it is you perceive as no
privilege at all it's just a set of
privileges that's more exotic to you
that you are less familiar with
subjectively okay so the ultimate
absurdity this comes down to is meat
eaters complaining that vegans have
privilege and again there's no point
denying it the same way that a
pedestrian has certain privileges okay I
choose to rent an apartment downtown and
pay more rent so I can walk to the gym
instead of having to drive a car to go
to the gym someone else pays half as
much rent but they have to drive a car
to go to the gym and then they have to
pay for parking so it's different in
terms of the costs involved likewise yes
there is a set of privileges involved in
choosing to eat a vegan diet but there's
also an unbelievable number of
privileges involved in eating a beef
base diet or a fish based ahead you have
the privilege of buying this product
wrapped in plastic that's been rendered
unto you by this unbelievable
corporate and government structure that
includes you know all the safety and
quality control so on and so forth you
get to you you have the ultimate you
know amassing of first world privilege
in making meat something you can you
know so easily access and consume and
let's face it guys at the end of the day
eating meat is actually more expensive I
mean it's harder for me to say that even
about car ownership if I had accepted a
job working at a bakery where I needed
to get up in the morning and drive my
car to the bakery at 3:00 a.m. because
bakeries open really early I couldn't
really look at and say well gee owning a
car is a privilege I wouldn't have the
option of living without a car the cost
of owning a car is necessary for the
money that I earned that's true for many
jobs and that's why I don't feel morally
superior to people who do own cars or
people who do drive cars
but it's a matter of fact it's more
expensive to eat beef it's more
expensive to eat shrimp it's more
expensive to eat cheese and it's cheaper
to eat
gentles it's cheaper need a diet that
eliminates those things so ultimately
yes in that case you can simply measure
which privilege is more economically
inefficient okay guys I think this is a
great example of a kind of rhetorical
device that's currently like dominance
in discussions of 21st century politics
it's a big deal on the left it's a big
deal on the right also and it
fundamentally cannot last I think just a
few years from now people will look back
and joke
remember what everyone was talking about
privilege the fundamental thing you have
to practice in order to defuse
meaningless hostile counterproductive
conversations about privilege is this
you have to remind people that the
opposite of privilege is not the absence
of privilege it's just a different set
of slightly less familiar privileges
that also deserve to be examined
analyzed and understood